<!-- README.md is generated from README.Rmd. Please edit that file -->

# NanoporeMet

The goal of this repository is to contain the scripts to analyze
(`nanoporemet.py`) and visualize (`app.R`, `coverage.py`) metagenomic
sequencing data generated by Oxford Nanopore Technologies sequencing
devices. Both viral and bacterial analyses are possible.

## nanoporemet.py

`nanoporemet.py` analyzes metagenomic sequencing reads with *kraken2*.
As to whether only viral or also bacterial analysis should be performed
can be decided through the selection of the *kraken2* database.

`nanoporemet.py` first concatenates all `.fastq.gz` files of each
barcode within `/fastq_pass`, then runs *kraken2* on all of them
individually, and finally combines all *kraken2* output files (i.e. from
each barcode) into one file, either `virus.kraken.txt` or
`virus_bacteria.kraken.txt` (depending on the selected database). If
`nanoporemet.py` is run after the sequencing run has finished and the
`sequencing_summary_*.txt` file is available, a `sequencing_summary.pdf`
file is created which plots histograms of the mean Q scores and read
lengths of all reads as well as reads passing the quality filter.

### How to run

1.  Enter timavo.

`ssh timavo`

2.  Activate kraken2.

`conda activate kraken`

3.  Move into the sequencing output directory, i.e., the one where you
    find, e.g., the `fastq_pass` subdirectory, or the
    `sequencing_summary_*.txt` file at the end of the sequencing run.

`cd /data/GridION/GridIONOutput/<experiment>/<sample>/<flowcell>/`

4.  Run the python script.

`python <path to script>/nanoporemet.py`

5.  The script asks you whether you want to analyze bacterial reads (in
    addition to only viral reads).

Reply with either `yes`/`y` or `no`/`n`.

### Input

#### Metagenomic sequencing data

Within the sequencing output directory, the script looks for the
`/fastq_pass` subdirectory and analyzes all `.fastq.gz` files.

#### *kraken2* databases

`nanoporemet.py` uses one of two *kraken2* databases to analyze the
reads. The paths to these databases are to be found within the script
and can easily be adjusted. The current databases are as follows:

- viral database: `k2_human-viral_20240111`

- viral + bacterial database: `k2_human-viral_20240111`

#### Run statistics

For the creation of the histogram plots, the script looks for
`sequencing_summary_*.txt` within the sequencing output directory. If it
is not available yet, this step is simply skipped.

### Output

#### *kraken2* analysis

The *kraken2* report with the analysis of all barcodes is saved in the
sequencing output directory. Depending on the selection of the *kraken*
database, the report is saved as `virus.kraken.txt` or
`virus_bacteria.kraken.txt`.

#### Run statistics

The histogram plots of the mean Q scores and read lengths of all reads
as well as the reads passing the quality filter are all saved in
`sequencing_summary.pdf`, which is also found within the sequencing
output directory.

## Shiny app

The `app.R` script is a Shiny app which serves to visualize the
*kraken2* report as generated by `nanoporemet.py`. Simply upload
`virus.kraken.txt` or `virus_bacteria.kraken.txt` to the app, select a
barcode and choose whether you want to analyze viral or bacterial reads,
on either species or genus level. Endogenous retroviruses and phages as
well as *blocklisted* viruses can be hidden from the output (the
blocklist can be updated within `app.R`).

The Shiny app shows the taxonomic distribution of the reads in a barplot
as well as a list with all found virus or bacterial species or genera
within the sample (per barcode).

## coverage.py

The `coverage.py` automates coverage plot generation for Oxford Nanopore
Technologies reads. First, it concatenates all reads within
`/fastq_pass` and then maps those reads to a desired reference sequence
(indexed `.fasta` file) using *minimap2*.

### How to run

1.  Enter timavo.

`ssh timavo`

2.  Activate minimap2.

`conda activate minimap2`

3.  Move into the sequencing output directory, i.e., the one where you
    find, e.g., the `fastq_pass` subdirectory.

`cd /data/GridION/GridIONOutput/<experiment>/<sample>/<flowcell>/`

4.  Run the python script.

`python <path to script>/coverage.py`

5.  You will be asked to enter the path to the indexed reference
    sequence.

### Input

#### Metagenomic sequencing data

Within the sequencing output directory, the script looks for the
`/fastq_pass` subdirectory and analyzes all `.fastq.gz` files.

#### Reference sequence

The path to the reference sequence is provided by the user upon running
the script. Make sure the reference sequence is indexed and stored in

`/analyses/ONT_analyses/bwa/references/<virus/bacteria>/<name>/`.

To index the reference `.fasta` file, move into
`/analyses/ONT_analyses/bwa/` and run:

`./bwa index ./references/<virus/bacteria>/<name>/*.fasta`.

### Output

#### Coverage plot

Within the sequencing output directory, you will find a new subdirectory
with the name of the reference sequence. Next to the coverage plot
(PDF), it also contains the `.sam`, `.bam`, and `.coverage` files.
